Michael link is Professor of Meritus at
Western University in London onario he's
joining us live from there thank you
very much indeed for being with us um if
I understand it correctly this is the
first time that Israel has been in front
of the icj or in fact any other court
International Court as a perpetrator
rather than as a victim how do you
assess the significance of what we're
seeing over the next couple of
days well the Israel obviously has
understood that um this isn't simply a
legal case case but it's a political
case playing out on the theater of
public opinion around the world um and
uh it it thinks I think that it has some
case to be able to make in arrain back
to South Africa um it's going to argue I
suspect tomorrow this is an educated
guess that it will probably use footage
uh from what happened on October 7th and
it also will argue self-defense um those
those would be probably the best two
arguments I can think of that Israel
will want to wind up raising but it
recognizes the huge reputational
consequences of uh any finding uh by the
court and in provisional measures with
respect to a plausible case of genocide
being found against it so this is why uh
it has contrary to its uh previous
pattern shown up to want to be able to
to argue this um uh at the uh at the
court and I as I said I suspect we'll
see uh plenty of arguments around those
two particular issues that's something
atrocious happened on a October 7th and
Israel had the right and the necessity
to defend its people by going after
Hamas and Gaza I I want to kind of
expand on that a little bit just for
viewers who are who are joining us and
maybe just uh trying to catch up with
what's been going on in the he if I
understand it from what you're saying
Israel's claim will be based on its
justification for the action that it
took based on the the hamus Le attack
into Southern Israel that happened in
October the the the seventh against the
South African case which is actually
based on the nature and the scale of
Israel's response is is that
fair oh look you know um when you're in
a weak uh position uh as a lawyer
representing a client you want to try to
argue your your very your very best
facts uh and focus and try to get the
court to focus on those and draw them
away from the arguments the facts and
the law that the other side has done I
must say having watched uh the South
African presentation of the day uh this
really was a top drawer uh uh case
example of advocacy all of the lawyers L
to an extremely persuasive uh and
strongly made case and that reflects you
know the uh the top drawer um uh
application that South Africa made uh
two weeks ago to the court 84 pages
single spaced over 560 footnotes um
arguing the facts and the law and the
need for a provisional measures and that
was all echoed today uh by the lawyers
in very calm measured fashion uh as they
uh as they presented before the court as
to why uh the atrocities they said uh
that are being laid out on the
television screens and the computer
screens around the world needed to be
stopped that was a an exceptionally
persuasive case put to the court and if
I was Israel then I'm going to focus on
what I think are are my strong points
which is October 7th and the right of
self-defense prime minister Benjamin
Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel has already
come rejecting the uh the hearings
themselves um there has been a
suggestion that they are baseless I
believe is the word the word that um the
US has used in relation to them if the
court given the fact that this is not
binding if the court finds in favor of
South Africa but Israel chooses to
essentially ignore that ruling what do
you think that tells us about the state
of international just Justice what kind
of perception would people have of it at
that point
interesting you say that because among
the very last points made by the south
the lawyers representing South Africa
today was that the that the very
reputation of international law itself
hangs in the balance with the decision
to be made by the icj on the South
African request and they laid out both
in the written application and in some
of the arguments made the number of
times that Israel has defied resolutions
coming from the security Council from
the general assembly L uh and also
Israel's Defiance of the ruling made
almost 20 years ago uh at the by the
international court of justice with
respect to the location of Israel's wall
that it's Building inside the occupied
West Bank so all of those were were
repeated reminders made by the South
African lawyers with respect to the
reputation of international law and I
thought that was a an exceptionally uh
incisive point that I'm sure many of the
judges will be considering uh with
respect to this you know the court is a
is a legal Court the judges are well
trained in in the law in international
law in particular but they're they're
mindful of the Court's reputation and
they're mindful of obviously that Israel
and the United States has taken strong
exception to the icj hearing this case
but it's also mindful the fact that
South Africa has an outsized reputation
in the world that it's bringing this as
a if you like a disinterested party to
the uh to the conflict in the in the
Middle East um and it's making this
compelling case about the centrality of
international law if you're going to
make any argument that's going to be
listened to very closely by a judge on
an international court it's about the
way in which international law has to be
protected and has to be enhanced in this
world Michael Ling is Professor of
Meritus at Western University in London
notar so we appreciate it thank you very
much
indeed thank you for having me